# Variable Types and Formats
Every variable is stored in memory either as a string (text) or numeric. This is the variable’s type, different from its format. Numeric variables are stored as byte, int, long, float or double. Float and double are the two that can hold non-integer numbers (decimals) and are the most common. You should not need to deal with the numeric types frequently though it is helpful to know of them. String variables storage types are identified by their character length (str4, str7, etc.,). Variables are stored as string if they have any nonnumeric character in them (this includes commas and periods if they are imported as such). See help data_types for more information about variable types. Useful commands to go between string and numeric variables are destring and tostring. The command destring turns a variable from a string into a numeric (must contain all nonnumeric characters). The command tostring changes a numeric variable into a string variable. 

The variables format is how you control how the data is displayed. This is how you can format numeric variables to display with commas or a specific number of decimal points. For details on the corresponding formats for each variable type and how to format variables, type help format or see the high intermediate Stata training materials. In short, it’s important that you match the variable format with the contents of the variable.

### Dates
The trickiest variable type and format to work with in Stata is dates. Stata stores dates as either the number of days, months, quarters, or years since January 1, 1960. Survey CTO defaults to storing date variables as strings when importing them to Stata, but it’s advantageous to convert these variables to a proper date format, as it allows us to do various logical and mathematical calculations (for example, you could count the number of days between a survey start date and end date). 

To convert your imported dates to be stored as a date type in Stata you will use the functions `date()` and `MDY()`. The date function is useful if your dates are stored as a string variable whereas the MDY function is useful if your dates are stored as numeric variables. These commands will create a variable that is the number of days since January 1, 1960. 

If you would like to convert your daily variable into a monthly or yearly variable you can use the following functions: `mofd()`,`yofd()`. You can find descriptions of all the functions that convert between which count types for dates (daily, monthly, quarterly, or yearly) by typing `help date()` and clicking on "Date and time functions" to go to the Stata manual. 

Once you have date in the right type, you can work with the formatting of the variable. The formatting is how you make the date look like a date rather than the underlying integer.  You can read how to format your dates in any way imaginable by typing `help datetime display formats`. Note that changing the format of a date variable does not change its underlying value. 
